I just want to start with a little bit
of a word of warning and that is my job
here tonight is to be a little bit of a
doctor bring me down so bear with me for
a few minutes and know that after this
things will get lighter and brighter so
let's start I know that many of you have
heard the travelers added to take
nothing but pictures leave nothing but
footprints well I'm gonna say I don't
think that's either as benign nor as
simple as it sounds particularly for
those of us in industries who are
portraying people in in poor countries
in developing countries and portraying
the poor and those of us in those
industries are reporters researchers and
people working for NGOs I suspect there
are a lot of us in those industries in
the audience and we're going overseas
and bringing back pictures like this are
the utterly distressed or the displaced
or the hungry
or the child Labor's or the exotic now
Susan Sontag reminds us that photographs
in part helped define what we have the
right to observe but more importantly
they are an ethics of seeing and I think
right now is a good time to review our
ethics of seeing as our industries of
reporting and research and NGO work are
collapsing and changing in part by
what's being driven by what's happening
in the economy but it's making us forge
new relationships and those new
relationships have some fuzzy boundaries
and I've worked at the edge of some of
these fuzzy boundaries and I want to
share with you some of my observations
now my ethics of seeing is informed by
25 years as a reporter covering emerging
economies and international relations
and I believe in a free and independent
press and I believe that journalism is a
public good but it's getting harder to
do that job in part because of the
massive layoffs because the budgets for
international reporting aren't there
anymore
new technologies and new platforms
begging new content and there are a lot
of new journalism's there's activist
journalism humanitarian journalism
journalism and we are all looking to
cover the important stories of our time
and so we're going to NGOs and asking
them if we can embed in their projects
and this is in part because they're
doing important work in interesting
places and that's one example here this
is a project I worked on in the Blue
Nile in Ethiopia and NGOs understand the
benefits of having reporters tagged
along on their team they need the
publicity they are under tremendous
pressure they're competing in a very
crowded market for compassion and so
they're also looking to reporters and to
hire freelance reporters to help them
develop their public relations material
and their media material now researchers
are also under pressure they're under
pressure to bring their to communicate
their science outside of the Academy so
they're collaborating with reporters
because for many researchers it's
difficult for them to write a simple
story or a clear story and the benefit
for reporters is that covering field
research is is some of the best work out
there and you not only get to cover
science but you get to meet interesting
scientists like my PhD advisor Ravi
sterling she of the magic research
high-tops there and it was in a
discussion with revi that brought us to
the edge of the researcher and reporter
that fuzzy boundary and I said to her I
said I was looking forward to going to
developing countries and doing research
and covering stories at the same time as
she said I don't think so girlfriend and
that confusion that mutual confusion
drove us to publish a paper on the
conflicting ethics and the contradictory
practices of research and reporting now
we started with the understanding that
researchers and reporters are distant
cousins equally storytellers and social
analysts but we don't see nor portray
developing communities the same way
here's a very classic example this is
Somalia 1992 it could be Somalia today
and this is a standard operating
procedure for much of the news video and
the news pictures that you see where a
group
reporters will be trucked in escorted to
the site of a disaster they'll produce
their material take their pictures get
their interviews and then they will be
escorted out this is decidedly not a
research setting now
sometimes we're working on feature
stories and this is an image I took of a
woman in Bangor village in Andhra
Pradesh in India and she's at a
microfinance meeting is a terrific story
and what's important here is that she is
identifiable you can see her face this
also is not a research picture this is
much more representative of a research
picture there's a it's a research site
you see young women accessing new
technologies it's more of a time stamp
it's a documentation of research I
couldn't use this for news it doesn't
tell enough and it wouldn't sell but
then the differences are even deeper
than that and Rebbie and I analyzed some
of the mandates that researchers are
under they are under some very strict
rules governed by their university
research review boards when it comes to
content and confidentiality researchers
are mandated to get to acquire document
informed consent well as a reporter if I
hang a microphone on someone that is
consent and when it comes to creating
the story
I'll fact check as a reporter but I
don't invite company to create that
story whereas social scientists
researchers and particularly
participatory researchers will often
work on constructing the narrative with
the community and when it comes to
paying for information checkbook
journalism is roundly discouraged in
part because of the bias that it
introduces in the kind of information
you get but social scientists understand
that people's time is valuable so they
pay them for that time
so while journalists are well-placed to
convey the beauty of the scientific
process and I would add the NGO process
what about the warts what happens if a
research project is not particularly
well designed or an NGO project doesn't
fulfill its goals or the other kind of
warts you know that happens after dark
when drinks happen
research environments and and reporting
trips and NGO projects are very intimate
environments you make good friends while
you're doing good work
but there's a little bit of Johnnie
Walker journalism after dark
and what happens to that line between
embedded and embedded or what do you do
with the odd and odious behavior so the
point is that you'll want to negotiate
in advance what is on the record or off
the record I want to turn now to some
NGO imagery which will be familiar to
some of you in this audience for about
70 cents you can buy a can of soda
regular or diet in Ethiopia for just 70
cents a day you can feed a child like
Jamal nourishing meals for about 70
cents you can also buy a cup of coffee
in Guatemala for 70 cents a day you can
help a child like Vilma get the clothes
she needs to attend school now there's
some very common imagery that's been
around for 40 years that's part of Sally
Struthers famine campaign we some of it
is very familiar it's the Madonna and
Child women and children are very
effective in terms of NGO campaigns
we've been looking at this imagery for a
long time for hundreds and hundreds of
years the Madonna and Child and here is
Mogadishu and here is Michelangelo my
concern is are we one noting the genders
in our narratives of poverty in the end
community and in developing communities
do we have women as victims and are men
only the perpetrators are they the guys
with the ak-47s or the boy soldiers
because that doesn't leave room for
stories like the man who's selling ice
cream at the refugee camp in southern
Sudan where we did a project or the
stories of the men who were working on
the bridge and over the Blue Nile so I
wonder are these stories inconvenient to
our narratives and what about this
narrative
this is a for-profit game and it's in
its aim is to make development fun and
one question is did they inadvertently
make fun of another set of questions is
what are the rights of these children
what rights of publicity or privacy do
they have did they get paid should they
get paid so they pass'd should they
share in the profit this is a for-profit
game did they sign talent waivers I have
to use these when I'm working with NGOs
and documentary filmmakers here in the
States in the States we take our right
to privacy and publicity very seriously
so what is it about getting on a
long-haul flight that makes these rights
vaporize I don't want to just pick on
our friends in the gaming arts I'll turn
to the graphic arts where we see often
see these monolithic homogenous stories
about the great country of Africa but
Africa is not a country it's a continent
it's 54 countries and thousands and
thousands of languages so my question is
is this imagery productive or is it
reductive I know that it's popular we
have USAID just launched their campaign
forward FWD famine war and drought and
by looking at it you would think that
that was happening all the time all over
Africa but this is about what's
happening in the Horn of Africa and I'm
still I'm still trying to make sense of
Africa in a piece of Wonder Bread so I'm
wondering about that and Germaine Greer
has wondered about the same things and
she says at breakfast and at dinner we
can sharpen our own appetites with a
plentiful dose of the pornography of war
genocide destitution and disease she's
right we have sharpened our appetites
but we can also sharpen our insights it
is not always war insurrection and
disease this is a picture out of South
Sudan just a couple of months before the
new country was born I will continue to
work as a researcher and a reporter in
developing countries but I do it with an
altered ethic
seeing I ask myself whether my pictures
are pandering whether they contribute to
stereotypes whether the images match the
message and am i complacent or am i
complicit thank you
[Applause]